{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf2757
\cocoatextscaling0\cocoaplatform0{\fonttbl\f0\fmodern\fcharset0 Courier;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;\red255\green255\blue255;}
{\*\expandedcolortbl;;\cssrgb\c100000\c100000\c100000;}
\paperw11900\paperh16840\margl1440\margr1440\vieww35640\viewh22400\viewkind0
\deftab720
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0

\f0\fs26 \cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
WOODCRAFT\
 AND CAMPING\
\
 _by_\
 "_Nessmuk_"\
\
 [Illustration]\
\
 DOVER PUBLICATIONS, INC.\
 NEW YORK\
\
\
\
\
 This Dover edition, first published in 1963, is a\
 slightly abridged and edited republication of the\
 work published by Forest and Stream Publishing\
 Company, New York, in 1920 under the title _Woodcraft_.\
\
 _International Standard Book Number: 0-486-21145-2\
 Library of Congress Catalog Card Number: 63-21680_\
\
 Manufactured in the United States of America\
 Dover Publications, Inc.\
 31 East 2nd Street, Mineola, N.Y. 11501\
\
\
\
\
Preface\
\
\
_Woodcraft_ is dedicated to the Grand Army of "Outers," as a pocket\
volume of reference on--woodcraft.\
\
      For brick and mortar breed filth and crime,\
    With a pulse of evil that throbs and beats;\
      And men are withered before their prime\
    By the curse paved in with the lanes and streets.\
\
      And lungs are poisoned and shoulders bowed,\
    In the smothering reek of mill and mine;\
      And death stalks in on the struggling crowd--\
    But he shuns the shadow of oak and pine.\
\
                                            NESSMUK.\
\
\
\
\
Contents\
\
\
  CHAPTER I                                                            1\
\
  Overwork and Recreation--Outing and Outers--How to Do It,\
  and Why They Miss It\
\
  CHAPTER II                                                           6\
\
  Knapsack, Hatchet, Knives, Tinware, Rods, Fishing Tackle,\
  Ditty-Bag\
\
  CHAPTER III                                                         13\
\
  Getting Lost--Camping Out--Roughing It or Smoothing\
  It--Insects--Camps, and How to Make Them\
\
  CHAPTER IV                                                          28\
\
  Camp-Fires and Their Importance--The Wasteful, Wrong\
  Way They Are Usually Made, and the Right Way to Make\
  Them\
\
  CHAPTER V                                                           35\
\
  Fishing, With and Without Flies--Some Tackle and Lures--Discursive\
  Remarks on the Gentle Art--The Headlight--Frogging\
\
  CHAPTER VI                                                          49\
\
  Camp Cooking--How It Is Usually Done, with a Few Simple\
  Hints on Plain Cooking--Cooking Fire and Out-Door Range\
\
  CHAPTER VII                                                         62\
\
  More Hints on Cooking, with Some Simple Receipts--Bread,\
  Coffee, Potatoes, Soup, Stews, Beans, Fish, Meat, Venison\
\
  CHAPTER VIII                                                        77\
\
  A Ten Days' Trip in the Wilderness--Going It Alone\
\
  CHAPTER IX--CANOEING                                                87\
\
  The Light Canoe and Double Blade--Various Canoes for Various\
  Canoeists--Reasons for Preferring the Clinker-Built Cedar\
\
  CHAPTER X                                                           95\
\
  Odds and Ends--Where to go for an Outing--Why a Clinker?--Boughs\
  and Browse\
\
  INDEX                                                              103\
\
\
\
\
Illustrations\
\
\
                                            _Page_\
  "Nessmuk"                         _Frontispiece_\
  Knapsack and Ditty-Bag                         7\
  Hatchet and Knives                             8\
  Indian Camp                                   19\
  Shanty-Tent and Camp-Fire                     24\
  Shanty-Tent Spread Out                        26\
  Camp-Fire as it Should Be Made                33\
  Frog Bait                                     41\
  Three-Hook Gang                               41\
  G. W. Hatchet                                 56\
  Out-Door Cooking-Range                        58\
\
\
\
\
Chapter I\
\
     OVERWORK AND RECREATION--OUTING AND OUTERS HOW TO DO IT, AND\
     WHY THEY MISS IT\
\
\
It does not need that Herbert Spencer should cross the ocean to tell us\
that we are an overworked nation; that our hair turns gray ten years\
earlier than the Englishman's; or, "that we have had somewhat too much\
of the gospel of work," and, "it is time to preach the gospel of\
relaxation." It is all true. But we work harder, accomplish more in a\
given time, and last quite as long as slower races. As to the gray\
hair--perhaps gray hair is better than none; and it is a fact that the\
average Briton becomes bald as early as the American turns gray. There\
is, however, a sad significance in his words when he says: "In every\
circle I have met men who had themselves suffered from nervous collapse\
due to stress of business, or named friends who had either killed\
themselves by overwork, or had been permanently incapacitated, or had\
wasted long periods in endeavors to recover health." Too true. And it is\
the constant strain, without let-up or relaxation, that, in nine cases\
out of ten, snaps the cord and ends in what the doctors call "nervous\
prostration"--something akin to paralysis--from which the sufferer\
seldom wholly recovers.\
\
Mr. Spencer quotes that quaint old chronicler, Froissart, as saying,\
"The English take their pleasures sadly, after their fashion"; and\
thinks if he lived now, he would say of Americans, "they take their\
pleasures hurriedly, after their fashion." Perhaps.\
\
It is an age of hurry and worry. Anything slower than steam is apt to\
"get left." Fortunes are quickly made and freely spent. Nearly all\
busy, hard-worked Americans have an intuitive sense of the need that\
exists for at least one period of rest and relaxation during each year,\
and all--or nearly all--are willing to pay liberally, too liberally in\
fact, for anything that conduces to rest, recreation and sport. I am\
sorry to say that we mostly get swindled. As an average, the summer\
outer who goes to forest, lake or stream for health and sport, gets\
about ten cents' worth for a dollar of outlay. A majority will admit--to\
themselves at least--that after a month's vacation, they return to work\
with an inward consciousness of being somewhat disappointed--and beaten.\
We are free with our money when we have it. We are known throughout the\
civilized world for our lavishness in paying for our pleasures; but it\
humiliates us to know we have been beaten, and this is what the most of\
us know at the end of a summer vacation. To the man of millions it makes\
little difference. He is able to pay liberally for boats, buckboards and\
"body service," if he chooses to spend a summer in the North Woods. He\
has no need to study the questions of lightness and economy in a forest\
and stream outing. Let his guides take care of him; and unto them and\
the landlords he will give freely of his substance.\
\
I do not write for him, and can do him little good. But there are\
hundreds of thousands of practical, useful men, many of them far from\
being rich; mechanics, artists, writers, merchants, clerks, business\
men--workers, so to speak--who sorely need and well deserve a season of\
rest and relaxation at least once a year. To these, and for these, I\
write.\
\
Perhaps more than fifty years of devotion to "woodcraft" may enable me\
to give a few useful hints and suggestions to those whose dreams, during\
the close season of work, are of camp-life by flood, field and forest.\
\
I have found that nearly all who have a real love of nature and\
out-of-door camp-life, spend a good deal of time and talk in planning\
future trips, or discussing the trips and pleasures gone by, but still\
dear to memory.\
\
    When the mountain streams are frozen and the Nor'land winds are out;\
\
when the winter winds are drifting the bitter sleet and snow; when\
winter rains are making out-of-door life unendurable; when season,\
weather and law combine to make it "close time" for beast, bird and man,\
it is well that a few congenial spirits should, at some favorite\
trysting place, gather around the glowing stove and exchange yarns,\
opinions and experiences. Perhaps no two will exactly agree on the best\
ground for an outing, on the flies, rods, reels, guns, etc., or half a\
dozen other points that may be discussed. But one thing all admit. Each\
and every one has gone to his chosen ground with too much impedimenta,\
too much duffle; and nearly all have used boats at least twice as heavy\
as they need to have been. The temptation to buy this or that bit of\
indispensable camp-kit has been too strong, and we have gone to the\
blessed woods, handicapped with a load fit for a pack-mule. This is not\
how to do it.\
\
Go light; the lighter the better, so that you have the simplest material\
for health, comfort and enjoyment.\
\
Of course, if you intend to have a permanent camp, and can reach it by\
boat or wagon, lightness is not so important, though even in that case\
it is well to guard against taking a lot of stuff that is likely to\
prove of more weight than worth--only to leave it behind when you come\
out.\
\
[Sidenote: Clothing]\
\
As to clothing for the woods, a good deal of nonsense has been written\
about "strong, coarse woolen clothes." You do not want coarse woolen\
clothes. Fine woolen cassimere of medium thickness for coat, vest and\
pantaloons, with no cotton lining. Color, slate gray or dead-leaf\
(either is good). Two soft, thick woolen shirts; two pairs of fine, but\
substantial, woolen drawers; two pairs of strong woolen socks or\
stockings; these are what you need, and all you need in the way of\
clothing for the woods, excepting hat and boots, or gaiters. Boots are\
best--providing you do not let yourself be inveigled into wearing a pair\
of long-legged heavy boots with thick soles, as has been often advised\
by writers who knew no better. Heavy, long-legged boots are a weary,\
tiresome incumbrance on a hard tramp through rough woods. Even moccasins\
are better. Gaiters, all sorts of high shoes, in fact, are too\
bothersome about fastening and unfastening. Light boots are best. Not\
thin, unserviceable affairs, but light as to actual weight. The\
following hints will give an idea for the best foot-gear for the woods;\
let them be single soled, single backs and single fronts, except light,\
short foot-linings. Back of solid "country kip"; fronts of substantial\
French calf; heel one inch high, with steel nails; countered outside;\
straps narrow, of fine French calf put on "astraddle," and set down to\
the top of the back. The out-sole stout, Spanish oak, and pegged rather\
than sewed, although either is good. They will weigh considerably less\
than half as much as the clumsy, costly boots usually recommended for\
the woods; and the added comfort must be tested to be understood.\
\
The hat should be fine, soft felt with moderately low crown and wide\
brim; color to match the clothing.\
\
The proper covering for head and feet is no slight affair, and will be\
found worth some attention. Be careful that the boots are not too tight,\
or the hat too loose. The above rig will give the tourist one shirt, one\
pair of drawers and a pair of socks to carry as extra clothing. A soft,\
warm blanket-bag, open at the ends, and just long enough to cover the\
sleeper, with an oblong square of water-proofed cotton cloth 6\'d78 feet,\
will give warmth and shelter by night and will weigh together five or\
six pounds. This, with the extra clothing, will make about eight pounds\
of dry goods to pack over carries, which is enough. Probably, also, it\
will be found little enough for comfort.\
\
During a canoe cruise across the Northern Wilderness in the late summer,\
I met many parties at different points in the woods, and the amount of\
unnecessary duffle with which they encumbered themselves was simply\
appalling. Why a shrewd business man, who goes through with a guide and\
makes a forest hotel his camping ground nearly every night, should\
handicap himself with a five-peck pack basket full of gray woolen and\
gum blankets, extra clothing, pots, pans, and kettles, with a 9-pound\
10-bore, and two rods--yes, and an extra pair of heavy boots hanging\
astride of the gun--well, it is one of the things I shall never\
understand. My own load, including canoe, extra clothing, blanket-bag,\
two days' rations, pocket-axe, rod and knapsack, never exceeded 26\
pounds; and I went prepared to camp out any and every night.\
\
[Sidenote: Preparations]\
\
People who contemplate an outing in the woods are pretty apt to commence\
preparations a long way ahead, and to pick up many trifling articles\
that suggest themselves as useful and handy in camp; all well enough in\
their way, but making at least a too heavy load. It is better to\
commence by studying to ascertain just how light one can go through\
without especial discomfort. A good plan is to think over the trip\
during leisure hours, and make out a list of indispensable articles,\
securing them beforehand, and have them stowed in handy fashion, so that\
nothing needful may be missing just when and where it cannot be\
procured. The list will be longer than one would think, but need not be\
cumbersome or heavy. As I am usually credited with making a cruise or a\
long woods tramp with exceptionally light duffle, I will give a list of\
the articles I take along--going on foot over carries or through the\
woods.\
\
\
\
\
Chapter II\
\
     KNAPSACK, HATCHET, KNIVES, TINWARE, RODS, FISHING TACKLE,\
     DITTY-BAG\
\
\
The clothing, blanket-bag and shelter-cloth are all that need be\
described in that line. The next articles that I look after are knapsack\
(or pack basket), rod with reel, lines, flies, hooks, and all my fishing\
gear, pocket-axe, knives and tinware. Firstly, the knapsack; as you are\
apt to carry it a great many miles, it is well to have it right, and\
easy-fitting at the start. Don't be induced to carry a pack basket. I am\
aware that it is in high favor all through the Northern Wilderness, and\
is also much used in other localities where guides and sportsmen most do\
congregate. But I do not like it. I admit that it will carry a loaf of\
bread, with tea, sugar, etc., without jamming; that bottles, crockery,\
and other fragile duffle is safer from breakage than in an oil-cloth\
knapsack. But it is by no means water-proof in a rain or a splashing\
head sea, is more than twice as heavy--always growing heavier as it gets\
wetter--and I had rather have bread, tea, sugar, etc., a little jammed\
than water-soaked. Also, it may be remarked that man is a vertebrate\
animal and ought to respect his backbone. The loaded pack basket on a\
heavy carry never fails to get in on the most vulnerable knob of the\
human vertebrae. The knapsack sits easy, and does not chafe. The one\
shown in the engraving is of good form; and the original--which I have\
carried for years--is satisfactory in every respect. It holds over half\
a bushel, carries blanket-bag, shelter tent, hatchet, ditty-bag,\
tinware, fishing tackle, clothes and two days' rations. It weighs,\
empty, just twelve ounces.\
\
[Sidenote: Hatchet and Knives]\
\
[Illustration: KNAPSACK AND DITTY-BAG]\
\
The hatchet and knives shown in the engraving will be found to fill the\
bill satisfactorily so far as cutlery may be required. Each is good and\
useful of its kind, the hatchet especially, being the best model I have\
ever found for a "double-barreled" pocket-axe. And just here let me\
digress for a little chat on the indispensable hatchet; for it is the\
most difficult piece of camp kit to obtain in perfection of which I have\
any knowledge. Before I was a dozen years old I came to realize that a\
light hatchet was a sine qua non in woodcraft, and I also found it a\
most difficult thing to get. I tried shingling hatchets, lathing\
hatchets, and the small hatchets to be found in country hardware stores,\
but none of them were satisfactory. I had quite a number made by\
blacksmiths who professed skill in making edge tools, and these were\
the worst of all, being like nothing on the earth or under\
it--murderous-looking, clumsy, and all too heavy, with no balance or\
proportion. I had hunted twelve years before I caught up with the\
pocket-axe I was looking for. It was made in Rochester, by a surgical\
instrument maker named Bushnell. It cost time and money to get it. I\
worked one rainy Saturday fashioning the pattern in wood. Spoiled a day\
going to Rochester, waited a day for the blade, paid $3.00 for it, and\
lost a day coming home. Boat fare $1.00, and expenses $2.00, besides\
three days lost time, with another rainy Sunday for making leather\
sheath and hickory handle.\
\
[Illustration: HATCHET AND KNIVES]\
\
My witty friends, always willing to help me out in figuring the cost of\
my hunting and fishing gear, made the following business-like estimate,\
which they placed where I would be certain to see it the first thing in\
the morning. Premising that of the five who assisted in that little\
joke, all stronger, bigger fellows than myself, four have gone "where\
they never see the sun," I will copy the statement as it stands today,\
on paper yellow with age. For I have kept it over forty years.\
\
                         A WOODSMAN,\
\
  _To getting up one limber-go-shiftless pocket-axe:_    DR.\
\
  Cost of blade                                        $3.00\
  Fare on boat                                          1.00\
  Expenses for 3 days                                   3.00\
  Three days lost time at $1.25 per day                 3.75\
  Two days making model, handle and sheath, say         2.00\
                                                    --------\
  Total                                               $12.75\
  Per contra, by actual value of axe                    2.00\
                                                    --------\
  Balance                                             $10.75\
\
Then they raised a horse laugh, and the cost of that hatchet became a\
standing joke and a slur on my "business ability." What aggravated me\
most was, that the rascals were not so far out in their calculation. And\
was I so far wrong? That hatchet was my favorite for nearly thirty\
years. It has been "upset" twice by skilled workmen; and, if my friend\
"Bero" has not lost it, is still in service.\
\
Would I have gone without it any year for one or two dollars? But I\
prefer the double blade. I want one thick, stunt edge for knots, deers'\
bones, etc., and a fine, keen edge for cutting clear timber.\
\
A word as to knife, or knives. These are of prime necessity, and should\
be of the best, both as to shape and temper. The "bowies" and "hunting\
knives" usually kept on sale, are thick, clumsy affairs, with a sort of\
ridge along the middle of the blade, murderous-looking, but of little\
use; rather fitted to adorn a dime novel or the belt of "Billy the Kid,"\
than the outfit of the hunter. The one shown in the cut is thin in the\
blade, and handy for skinning, cutting meat, or eating with. The strong\
double-bladed pocket knife is the best model I have yet found, and, in\
connection with the sheath knife, is all sufficient for camp use. It is\
not necessary to take table cutlery into the woods. A good fork may be\
improvised from a beech or birch stick; and the half of a fresh-water\
mussel shell, with a split stick by way of handle, makes an excellent\
spoon.\
\
[Sidenote: _Cooking Utensils_]\
\
My entire outfit for cooking and eating dishes comprises five pieces of\
tinware. This is when stopping in a permanent camp. When cruising and\
tramping, I take just two pieces in the knapsack.\
\
I get a skillful tinsmith to make one dish as follows: Six inches on\
bottom, 6-3/4 inches on top, side 2 inches high. The bottom is of the\
heaviest tin procurable, the sides of lighter tin, and seamed to be\
water-tight without solder. The top simply turned, without wire. The\
second dish to be made the same, but small enough to nest in the first,\
and also to fit into it when inverted as a cover. Two other dishes made\
from common pressed tinware, with the tops cut off and turned, also\
without wire. They are fitted so that they all nest, taking no more room\
than the largest dish alone, and each of the three smaller dishes makes\
a perfect cover for the next larger. The other piece is a tin\
camp-kettle, also of the heaviest tin, and seamed water-tight. It holds\
two quarts, and the other dishes nest in it perfectly, so that when\
packed the whole takes just as much room as the kettle alone. I should\
mention that the strong ears are set below the rim of the kettle, and\
the bale falls outside, so, as none of the dishes have any handle, there\
are no aggravating "stickouts" to wear and abrade. The snug affair\
weighs, all told, two pounds. I have met parties in the North Woods\
whose one frying pan weighed more--with its handle three feet long. How\
ever did they get through the brush with such a culinary terror?\
\
It is only when I go into a very accessible camp that I take so much as\
five pieces of tinware along. I once made a ten days' tramp through an\
unbroken wilderness on foot, and all the dish I took was a ten-cent tin;\
it was enough. I believe I will tell the story of that tramp before I\
get through. For I saw more game in the ten days than I ever saw before\
or since in a season; and I am told that the whole region is now a\
thrifty farming country, with the deer nearly all gone. They were plenty\
enough thirty-nine years ago this very month.\
\
[Sidenote: _Rods_]\
\
I feel more diffidence in speaking of rods than of any other matter\
connected with out-door sports. The number and variety of rods and\
makers; the enthusiasm of trout and fly "cranks"; the fact that angling\
does not take precedence of all other sports with me, with the\
humiliating confession that I am not above bucktail spinners, worms and\
sinkers, minnow tails and white grubs--this and these constrain me to be\
brief.\
\
But, as I have been a fisher all my life, from my pinhook days to the\
present time; as I have run the list pretty well up, from brook minnows\
to 100-pound albacores, I may be pardoned for a few remarks on the rod\
and the use thereof.\
\
A rod may be a very high-toned, high-priced aesthetic plaything, costing\
$50 to $75, or it may be--a rod. A serviceable and splendidly balanced\
rod can be obtained from first class makers for less money. By all means\
let the man of money indulge his fancy for the most costly rod that can\
be procured. He might do worse. A practical every day sportsman whose\
income is limited will find that a more modest product will drop his\
flies on the water quite as attractively to _Salmo fontinalis_. My\
little 8-1/2-foot, 4-3/4-ounce split bamboo which the editor of _Forest\
and Stream_ had made for me cost $10.00. I have given it hard usage and\
at times large trout have tested it severely, but it has never failed\
me. The dimensions of my second rod are 9-1/2 feet long and 5-3/4 ounces\
in weight. This rod will handle the bucktail spinners which I use for\
trout and bass, when other things have failed. I used a rod of this\
description for several summers both in Adirondack and western waters.\
It had a hand-made reel seat, agate first guide, was satisfactory in\
every respect, and I could see in balance, action, and appearance no\
superiority in a rod costing $25.00, which one of my friends sported.\
Charles Dudley Warner, who writes charmingly of woods life, has the\
following in regard to trout fishing, which is so neatly humorous that\
it will bear repeating:\
\
"It is well known that no person who regards his reputation will ever\
kill a trout with anything but a fly. It requires some training on the\
part of the trout to take to this method. The uncultivated trout in\
unfrequented waters prefers the bait; and the rural people, whose sole\
object in going a-fishing appears to be to catch fish, indulge them in\
their primitive state for the worm. No sportsman, however, will use\
anything but a fly--except he happens to be alone." Speaking of rods, he\
says: "The rod is a bamboo weighing seven ounces, which has to be\
spliced with a winding of silk thread every time it is used. This is a\
tedious process; but, by fastening the joints in this way, a uniform\
spring is secured in the rod. No one devoted to high art would think of\
using a socket joint."\
\
One summer during a seven weeks' tour in the Northern Wilderness, my\
only rod was a 7-1/2 foot Henshall. It came to hand with two bait-tips\
only; but I added a fly-tip, and it made an excellent "general fishing\
rod." With it I could handle a large bass or pickerel; it was a capital\
bait-rod for brook trout; as fly rod it has pleased me well enough. It\
is likely to go with me again. For reel casting, the 5-1/2 foot rod is\
handier. But it is not yet decided which is best, and I leave every man\
his own opinion. Only, I think one rod enough, but have always had more.\
\
And don't neglect to take what sailors call a "ditty-bag." This may be\
a little sack of chamois leather about 4 inches wide by 6 inches in\
length. Mine is before me as I write. Emptying the contents, I find it\
inventories as follows: A dozen hooks, running in size from small minnow\
hooks to large Limericks; four lines of six yards each, varying from the\
finest to a size sufficient for a ten-pound fish; three darning needles\
and a few common sewing needles; a dozen buttons; sewing silk; thread,\
and a small ball of strong yarn for darning socks; sticking salve; a bit\
of shoemaker's wax; beeswax; sinkers, and a very fine file for\
sharpening hooks. The ditty-bag weighs, with contents, 2-1/2 ounces; and\
it goes in a small buckskin bullet pouch, which I wear almost as\
constantly as my hat. The pouch has a sheath strongly sewed on the back\
side of it, where the light hunting knife is always at hand, and it also\
carries a two-ounce vial of fly medicine, a vial of "pain killer," and\
two or three gangs of hooks on brass wire snells--of which, more in\
another place. I can always go down into that pouch for a water-proof\
match safe, strings, compass, bits of linen and scarlet flannel (for\
frogging), copper tacks, and other light duffle. It is about as handy a\
piece of woods-kit as I carry.\
\
I hope no aesthetic devotee of the fly-rod will lay down the book in\
disgust when I confess to a weakness for frogging. I admit that it is\
not high-toned sport; and yet I have got a good deal of amusement out of\
it. The persistence with which a large batrachian will snap at a bit of\
red flannel after being several times hooked on the same lure, and the\
comical way in which he will scuttle off with a quick succession of\
short jumps after each release; the cheerful manner in which, after each\
bout, he will tune up his deep, bass pipe--ready for another greedy snap\
at an ibis fly or red rag--is rather funny. And his hind legs, rolled in\
meal and nicely browned, are preferable to trout or venison.\
\
\
\
\
Chapter III\
\
     GETTING LOST--CAMPING OUT--ROUGHING IT OR SMOOTHING\
     IT--INSECTS--CAMPS, AND HOW TO MAKE THEM\
\
\
With a large majority of prospective tourists and outers, "camping out"\
is a leading factor in the summer vacation. And during the long winter\
months they are prone to collect in little knots and talk much of camps,\
fishing, hunting, and "roughing it." The last phrase is very popular and\
always cropping out in the talks on matters pertaining to a vacation in\
the woods. I dislike the phrase. We do not go to the green woods and\
crystal waters to rough it, we go to smooth it. We get it rough enough\
at home; in towns and cities; in shops, offices, stores, banks--anywhere\
that we may be placed--with the necessity always present of being on\
time and up to our work; of providing for the dependent ones; of keeping\
up, catching up, or getting left. "Alas for the life-long battle, whose\
bravest slogan is bread."\
\
As for the few fortunate ones who have no call to take a hand in any\
strife or struggle, who not only have all the time there is, but a great\
deal that they cannot dispose of with any satisfaction to themselves or\
anybody else--I am not writing for them; but only to those of the\
world's workers who go, or would like to go, every summer to the woods.\
And to these I would say, don't rough it; make it as smooth, as restful\
and pleasurable as you can.\
\
To this end you need pleasant days and peaceful nights. You cannot\
afford to be tormented and poisoned by insects, nor kept awake at night\
by cold and damp, nor to exhaust your strength by hard tramps and heavy\
loads. Take it easy, and always keep cool. Nine men out of ten, on\
finding themselves lost in the woods, fly into a panic, and quarrel with\
the compass. Never do that. The compass is always right, or nearly so.\
It is not many years since an able-bodied man--sportsman of course--lost\
his way in the North Woods, and took fright, as might be expected. He\
was well armed and well found for a week in the woods. What ought to\
have been only an interesting adventure, became a tragedy. He tore\
through thickets and swamps in his senseless panic, until he dropped and\
died through fright, hunger and exhaustion.\
\
A well authenticated story is told of a guide in the Oswegatchie region,\
who perished in the same way. Guides are not infallible; I have known\
more than one to get lost. Wherefore, should you be tramping through a\
pathless forest on a cloudy day, and should the sun suddenly break from\
under a cloud in the northwest about noon, don't be scared. The last day\
is not at hand, and the planets have not become mixed; only, you are\
turned. You have gradually swung around, until you are facing northwest\
when you meant to travel south. It has a muddling effect on the\
mind--this getting lost in the woods. But, if you can collect and\
arrange your gray brain matter, and suppress all panicky feeling, it is\
easily got along with. For instance; it is morally certain that you\
commenced swinging to southwest, then west, to northwest. Had you kept\
on until you were heading directly north, you could rectify your course\
simply by following a true south course. But, as you have varied\
three-eighths of the circle, set your compass and travel by it to the\
southeast, until, in your judgment, you have about made up the\
deviation; then go straight south, and you will not be far wrong. Carry\
the compass in your hand and look at it every few minutes; for the\
tendency to swerve from a straight course when a man is once lost--and\
nearly always to the right--is a thing past understanding.\
\
[Sidenote: Insect Pests]\
\
As regards poisonous insects, it may be said that, to the man with\
clean, bleached, tender skin, they are, at the start, an unendurable\
torment. No one can enjoy life with a smarting, burning, swollen face,\
while the attacks on every exposed inch of skin are persistent and\
constant. I have seen a young man after two days' exposure to these\
pests come out of the woods with one eye entirely closed and the brow\
hanging over it like a clam shell, while face and hands were almost\
hideous from inflammation and puffiness. The St. Regis and St. Francis\
Indians, although born and reared in the woods, by no means make light\
of the black fly.\
\
It took the man who could shoot Phantom Falls to find out, "Its bite is\
not severe, nor is it ordinarily poisonous. There may be an occasional\
exception to this rule; but beside the bite of the mosquito, it is\
comparatively mild and harmless." And again: "Gnats ... in my way of\
thinking, are much worse than the black fly or mosquito." So says\
Murray. Our observations differ. A thousand mosquitoes and as many gnats\
can bite me without leaving a mark, or having any effect save the pain\
of the bite while they are at work. But each bite of the black fly makes\
a separate and distinct boil, that will not heal and be well in two\
months.\
\
While fishing for brook trout in July last, I ran into a swarm of them\
on Moose River, and got badly bitten. I had carelessly left my medicine\
behind. On the first of October the bites had not ceased to be painful,\
and it was three months before they disappeared entirely. Frank Forester\
says, in his _Fish and Fishing_, page 371, that he has never fished for\
the red-fleshed trout of Hamilton county, "being deterred therefrom by\
dread of that curse of the summer angler, the black fly, which is to me\
especially venomous."\
\
"Adirondack Murray" gives extended directions for beating these little\
pests by the use of buckskin gloves with chamois gauntlets, Swiss mull,\
fine muslin, etc. Then he advises a mixture of sweet oil and tar, which\
is to be applied to face and hands; and he adds that it is easily washed\
off, leaving the skin soft and smooth as an infant's; all of which is\
true. But, more than forty years' experience in the woods has taught me\
that the following recipe is infallible anywhere that _sancudos_,\
_moquims_, or our own poisonous insects do most abound.\
\
It was published in _Forest and Stream_ in the summer of 1880, and again\
in '83. It has been pretty widely quoted and adopted, and I have never\
known it to fail: Three ounces pine tar, two ounces castor oil, one\
ounce pennyroyal oil. Simmer all together over a slow fire, and bottle\
for use. You will hardly need more than a two-ounce vial full in a\
season. One ounce has lasted me six weeks in the woods. Rub it in\
thoroughly and liberally at first, and after you have established a good\
glaze, a little replenishing from day to day will be sufficient. And\
don't fool with soap and towels where insects are plenty. A good safe\
coat of this varnish grows better the longer it is kept on--and it is\
cleanly and wholesome. If you get your face and hands crocky or smutty\
about the camp-fire, wet the corner of your handkerchief and rub it off,\
not forgetting to apply the varnish at once, wherever you have cleaned\
it off. Last summer I carried a cake of soap and a towel in my knapsack\
through the North Woods for a seven weeks' tour, and never used either a\
single time. When I had established a good glaze on the skin, it was too\
valuable to be sacrificed for any weak whim connected with soap and\
water. When I struck a woodland hotel, I found soap and towels plenty\
enough. I found the mixture gave one's face the ruddy tanned look\
supposed to be indicative of health and hard muscle. A thorough ablution\
in the public wash basin reduced the color, but left the skin very soft\
and smooth; in fact, as a lotion for the skin it is excellent. It is a\
soothing and healing application for poisonous bites already received.\
\
I have given some space to the insect question, but no more than it\
deserves or requires. The venomous little wretches are quite important\
enough to spoil many a well planned trip to the woods, and it is best to\
beat them from the start. You will find that immunity from insects and a\
comfortable camp are the two first and most indispensable requisites of\
an outing in the woods. And just here I will briefly tell how a young\
friend of mine went to the woods, some twenty-five years ago. He was a\
bank clerk, and a good fellow withal, with a leaning toward camp-life.\
\
For months, whenever we met, he would introduce his favorite topics,\
fishing, camping out, etc. At last in the hottest of the hot months, the\
time came. He put in an appearance with a fighting cut on his hair, a\
little stiff straw hat, and a soft skin, bleached by long confinement in\
a close office. I thought he looked a little tender; but he was\
sanguine. He could rough it, could sleep on the bare ground with the\
root of a tree for a pillow; as for mosquitoes and punkies, he never\
minded them.\
\
[Sidenote: _Beware the Black Fly_]\
\
We went in a party of five--two old hunters and three youngsters, the\
latter all enthusiasm and pluck--at first. Toward the last end of a\
heavy eight-mile tramp, they grew silent, and slapped and scratched\
nervously. Arriving at the camping spot, they worked fairly well, but\
were evidently weakening a little. By the time we were ready to turn in\
they were reduced pretty well to silence and suffering--especially the\
bank clerk, Jean L. The punkies were eager for his tender skin, and they\
were rank poison to him. He muffled his head in a blanket and tried to\
sleep, but it was only a partial success. When, by suffocating himself,\
he obtained a little relief from insect bites, there were stubs and\
knotty roots continually poking themselves among his ribs, or digging\
into his backbone.\
\
I have often had occasion to observe that stubs, roots and small stones,\
etc., have a perverse tendency to abrade the anatomy of people unused to\
the woods. Mr. C. D. Warner has noticed the same thing, I believe.\
\
On the whole, Jean and the other youngsters behaved very well. Although\
they turned out in the morning with red, swollen faces and half closed\
eyes, they all went trouting and caught about 150 small trout between\
them. They did their level bravest to make a jolly thing of it; but\
Jean's attempt to watch a deerlick, resulted in a wetting through the\
sudden advent of a shower; and the shower drove about all the punkies\
and mosquitoes in the neighborhood under our roof for shelter. I never\
saw them more plentiful or worse. Jean gave in and varnished his pelt\
thoroughly with my "punkie dope," as he called it; but, too late; the\
mischief was done. And the second trial was worse to those youngsters\
than the first. More insects. More stubs and knots. Owing to these\
little annoyances, they arrived at home several days before their\
friends expected them--leaving enough rations in camp to last Old Sile\
and the writer a full week. And the moral of it is, if they had fitted\
themselves for the the woods before going there, the trip would have\
been a pleasure instead of a misery.\
\
One other little annoyance I will mention, as a common occurrence among\
those who camp out; this is the lack of a pillow. I suppose I have\
camped fifty times with people, who, on turning in, were squirming\
around for a long time, trying to get a rest for the head. Boots are the\
most common resort. But, when you place a boot-leg--or two of\
them--under your head, they collapse, and make a head-rest less than\
half an inch thick. Just why it never occurs to people that a stuffing\
of moss, leaves, or hemlock browse, would fill out the bed-leg and make\
a passable pillow, is another conundrum I cannot answer. But there is\
another and better way of making a pillow for camp use, which I will\
describe further on.\
\
And now I wish to devote some space to one of the most important\
adjuncts of woodcraft, i.e., camps; how to make them, and how to make\
them comfortable. There are camps, and camps. There are camps in the\
North Woods that are really fine villas, costing thousands of dollars,\
and there are log-houses, and shanties, and bark camps, and A tents, and\
walled tents, shelter tents and shanty tents. But, I assume that the\
camp best fitted to the wants of the average outer is the one that\
combines the essentials of dryness, lightness, portability, cheapness,\
and is easily and quickly put up. Another essential is, that it must\
admit of a bright fire in front by night or day. I will give short\
descriptions of the forest shelters (camps) I have found handiest and\
most useful.\
\
Firstly, I will mention a sort of camp that was described in a\
sportsman's paper, and has since been largely quoted and used. It is\
made by fastening a horizontal pole to a couple of contiguous trees, and\
then putting on a heavy covering of hemlock boughs, shingling them with\
the tips downward, of course. A fire is to be made at the roots of one\
of the trees. This, with plenty of boughs, may be made to stand a pretty\
stiff rain; but it is only a damp arbor, and no camp, properly speaking.\
A forest camp should always admit of a bright fire in front, with a\
lean-to or shed roof overhead, to reflect the fire heat on the bedding\
below. Any camp that falls short of this, lacks the requirements of\
warmth, brightness and healthfulness. This is why I discard all close,\
canvas tents.\
\
[Sidenote: _The Indian Camp_]\
\
[Illustration: INDIAN CAMP]\
\
The simplest and most primitive of all camps is the "Indian camp." It\
is easily and quickly made, is warm and comfortable, and stands a pretty\
heavy rain when properly put up. This is how it is made: Let us say you\
are out and have slightly missed your way. The coming gloom warns you\
that night is shutting down. You are no tenderfoot. You know that a\
place of rest is essential to health and comfort through the long, cold\
November night. You dive down the first little hollow until you strike a\
rill of water, for water is a prime necessity. As you draw your hatchet\
you take in the whole situation at a glance. The little stream is\
gurgling downward in a half choked frozen way. There is a huge sodden\
hemlock lying across it. One clip of the hatchet shows it will peel.\
There is plenty of smaller timber standing around; long, slim poles,\
with a tuft of foliage on top. Five minutes suffice to drop one of\
these, cut a twelve-foot pole from it, sharpen the pole at each end, jam\
one end into the ground and the other into the rough back of a scraggy\
hemlock, and there is your ridge pole. Now go--with your hatchet--for\
the bushiest and most promising young hemlocks within reach. Drop them\
and draw them to camp rapidly. Next, you need a fire. There are fifty\
hard, resinous limbs sticking up from the prone hemlock; lop off a few\
of these, and split the largest into match timber; reduce the splinters\
to shavings, scrape the wet leaves from your prospective fireplace, and\
strike a match on the balloon part of your trousers. If you are a\
woodsman you will strike but one. Feed the fire slowly at first; it will\
gain fast. When you have a blaze ten feet high, look at your watch. It\
is 6 P.M. You don't want to turn in before 10 o'clock, and you have four\
hours to kill before bed-time. Now, tackle the old hemlock; take off\
every dry limb, and then peel the bark and bring it to camp. You will\
find this takes an hour or more.\
\
Next, strip every limb from your young hemlocks, and shingle them onto\
your ridge pole. This will make a sort of bear den, very well calculated\
to give you a comfortable night's rest. The bright fire will soon dry\
the ground that is to be your bed, and you will have plenty of time to\
drop another small hemlock and make a bed of browse a foot thick. You do\
it. Then you make your pillow. Now, this pillow is essential to comfort\
and very simple. It is half a yard of muslin, sewed up as a bag, and\
filled with moss or hemlock browse. You can empty it and put it in your\
pocket, where it takes up about as much room as a handkerchief. You have\
other little muslin bags--an' you be wise. One holds a couple of ounces\
of good tea; another, sugar; another is kept to put your loose duffle\
in: money, match safe, pocket-knife. You have a pat of butter and a bit\
of pork, with a liberal slice of brown bread; and before turning in you\
make a cup of tea, broil a slice of pork, and indulge in a lunch.\
\
Ten o'clock comes. The time has not passed tediously. You are warm, dry\
and well-fed. Your old friends, the owls, come near the fire-light and\
salute you with their strange wild notes; a distant fox sets up for\
himself with his odd, barking cry and you turn in. Not ready to sleep\
just yet.\
\
But you drop off; and it is two bells in the morning watch when you\
waken with a sense of chill and darkness. The fire has burned low, and\
snow is falling. The owls have left, and a deep silence broods over the\
cold, still forest. You rouse the fire, and, as the bright light shines\
to the furthest recesses of your forest den, get out the little pipe,\
and reduce a bit of navy plug to its lowest denomination. The smoke\
curls lazily upward; the fire makes you warm and drowsy, and again you\
lie down--to again awaken with a sense of chilliness--to find the fire\
burned low, and daylight breaking. You have slept better than you would\
in your own room at home. You have slept in an "Indian camp."\
\
You have also learned the difference between such a simple shelter and\
an open air bivouac under a tree or beside an old log.\
\
Another easily made and very comfortable camp is the "brush shanty," as\
it is usually called in Northern Pennsylvania. The frame for such a\
shanty is a cross-pole resting on two crotches about six feet high, and\
enough straight poles to make a foundation for the thatch. The poles are\
laid about six inches apart, one end of the ground, the other on the\
cross-pole, and at a pretty sharp angle. The thatch is made of the\
fan-like boughs cut from the thrifty young hemlock, and are to be laid\
bottom upward and feather end down. Commence to lay them from the\
ground, and work up to the cross-pole, shingling them carefully as you\
go. If the thatch be laid a foot in thickness, and well done, the shanty\
will stand a pretty heavy rain--better than the average bark roof, which\
is only rain-proof in dry weather.\
\
A bark camp, however, may be a very neat sylvan affair, provided you are\
camping where spruce or balsam fir may be easily reached, and in the hot\
months when bark will "peel"; and you have a day in which to work at a\
camp. The best bark camps I have ever seen are in the Adirondacks. Some\
of them are rather elaborate in construction, requiring two or more\
days' hard labor by a couple of guides. When the stay is to be a long\
one, and the camp permanent, perhaps it will pay.\
\
[Sidenote: _The Shanty-Tent_]\
\
As good a camp as I have ever tried--perhaps the best--is the\
"shanty-tent," shown in the illustration. It is easily put up, is\
comfortable, neat, and absolutely rain-proof. Of course, it may be of\
any required size; but, for a party of two, the following dimensions and\
directions will be found all sufficient:\
\
Firstly, the roof. This is merely a sheet of strong cotton cloth 9 feet\
long by 4 or 4-1/2 feet in width. The sides, of the same material, to be\
4-1/2 feet deep at front, and 2 feet deep at the back. This gives 7 feet\
along the edge of the roof, leaving 2 feet for turning down at the back\
end of the shanty. It will be seen that the sides must be "cut bias," to\
compensate for the angle of the roof, otherwise the shanty will not be\
square and shipshape when put up. Allowing for waste in cutting, it\
takes nearly 3 yards of cloth for each side. The only labor required in\
making, is to cut the sides to the proper shape, and stitch them to the\
roof. No buttons, strings, or loops. The cloth does not even require\
hemming. It does, however, need a little water-proofing; for which the\
following receipt will answer very well, and add little or nothing to\
the weight: To 10 quarts of water add 10 ounces of lime, and 4 ounces of\
alum; let it stand until clear; fold the cloth snugly and put it in\
another vessel, pour the solution on it, let it soak for 12 hours; then\
rinse in luke-warm rain water, stretch and dry in the sun, and the\
shanty-tent is ready for use.\
\
[Sidenote: _Construction_]\
\
To put it up properly, make a neat frame as follows: Two strong stakes\
or posts for the front, driven firmly in the ground 4-1/2 feet apart; at\
a distance of 6 feet 10 inches from these, drive two other posts--these\
to be 4 feet apart--for back end of shanty. The front posts to be 4-1/2\
feet high, the back rests only two feet. The former also to incline a\
little toward each other above, so as to measure from outside of posts,\
just 4 feet at top. This gives a little more width at front end of\
shanty, adding space and warmth. No crotches are used in putting up the\
shanty-tent. Each of the four posts is fitted on the top to receive a\
flat-ended cross-pole, and admit of nailing. When the posts are squarely\
ranged and driven, select two straight, hard-wood rods, 2 inches in\
diameter, and 7 feet in length--or a little more. Flatten the ends\
carefully and truly, lay them alongside on top from post to post, and\
fasten them with a light nail at each end. Now, select two more straight\
rods of the same size, but a little over 4 feet in length; flatten the\
ends of these as you did the others, lay them crosswise from side to\
side, and lapping the ends of the other rods; fasten them solidly by\
driving a six-penny nail through the ends and into the posts, and you\
have a square frame 7\'d74 feet. But it is not yet complete. Three light\
rods are needed for rafters. These are to be placed lengthwise of the\
roof at equal distances apart, and nailed or tied to keep them in place.\
Then take two straight poles a little over 7 feet long, and some 3\
inches in diameter. These are to be accurately flattened at the ends,\
and nailed to the bottom of the posts, snug to the ground, on outside\
of posts. A foot-log and head-log are indispensable. These should be\
about 5 inches in diameter, and of a length to just reach from outside\
to outside of posts. They should be squared at ends, and the foot-log\
placed against the front post, outside, and held firmly in place by two\
wooden pins. The head-log is fastened the same way, except that it goes\
against the inside of the back posts; and the frame is complete. Round\
off all sharp angles or corners with knife and hatchet, and proceed to\
spread and fasten the cloth. Lay the roof on evenly, and tack it truly\
to the front cross-rod, using about a dozen six-ounce tacks. Stretch the\
cloth to its bearings, and tack it at the back end in the same manner.\
Stretch it sidewise and tack the sides to the side poles, fore and aft.\
Tack front and back ends of sides to the front and back posts. Bring\
down the 2-foot flap of roof at back end of shanty; stretch, and tack it\
snugly to the back posts--and your sylvan house is done. It is\
rain-proof, wind-proof, warm and comfortable. The foot and head logs\
define the limits of your forest dwelling; within which you may pile\
fragrant hemlock browse as thick as you please, and renew it from day to\
day. It is the perfect camp.\
\
You may put it up with less care and labor, and make it do very well.\
But I have tried to explain how to do it in the best manner; to make it\
all sufficient for an entire season. And it takes longer to tell it on\
paper than to do it.\
\
When I go to the woods with a partner, and we arrive at our camping\
ground, I like him to get his fishing rig together, and start out for a\
half day's exercise with his favorite flies, leaving me to make the camp\
according to my own notions of woodcraft. If he will come back about\
dusk with a few pounds of trout, I will have a pleasant camp and a\
bright fire for him. And if he has enjoyed wading an icy stream more\
than I have making the camp--he has had a good day.\
\
Perhaps it may not be out of place to say that the camp, made as above,\
calls for fifteen bits of timber, posts, rods, etc., a few shingle\
nails, and some six-penny wrought nails, with a paper of six-ounce\
tacks. Nails and tacks will weigh about five ounces, and are always\
useful. In tacking the cloth, turn the raw edge in until you have four\
thicknesses, as a single thickness is apt to tear. If you desire to\
strike camp, it takes about ten minutes to draw and save all the nails\
and tacks, fold the cloth smoothly, and deposit the whole in your\
knapsack. If you wish to get up a shelter tent on fifteen minutes'\
notice, cut and sharpen a twelve-foot pole as for the Indian camp, stick\
one end in the ground, the other in the rough bark of a large\
tree--hemlock is best--hang the cloth on the pole, fasten the sides to\
rods, and the rods to the ground with inverted crotches, and your\
shelter tent is ready for you to creep under.\
\
[Illustration: SHANTY-TENT AND CAMP-FIRE]\
\
The above description of the shanty-tent may seem a trifle elaborate,\
but I hope it is plain. The affair weighs just three pounds, and it\
takes a skillful woodsman about three hours of easy work to put it in\
the shape described. Leaving out some of the work, and only aiming to\
get it up in square shape as quickly as possible, I can put it up in an\
hour. The shanty as it should be, is shown in the illustration very\
fairly. And the shape of the cloth when spread out, is shown in the\
diagram on page 26. On the whole, it is the best form of close-side tent\
I have found. It admits of a bright fire in front, without which a\
forest camp is just no camp at all to me. I have suffered enough in\
close, dark, cheerless, damp tents.\
\
More than thirty years ago I became disgusted with the clumsy, awkward,\
comfortless affairs that, under many different forms, went under the\
name of camps. Gradually I came to make a study of "camping out." It\
would take too much time and space, should I undertake to describe all\
the different styles and forms I have tried. But I will mention a few of\
the best and worst.\
\
[Sidenote: _Other Camps_]\
\
The old Down East "coal cabin" embodied the principle of the Indian\
camp. The frame was simply two strong crotches set firmly in the ground\
at a distance of eight feet apart, and interlocking at top. These\
supported a stiff ridge-pole fifteen feet long, the small end sharpened\
and set in the ground. Refuse boards, shooks, stakes, etc., were placed\
thickly from the ridge-pole to the ground; a thick layer of straw was\
laid over these, and the whole was covered a foot thick with earth and\
sods, well beaten down. A stone wall five feet high at back and sides\
made a most excellent fireplace; and these cabins were weather-proof and\
warm, even in zero weather. But they were too cumbersome, and included\
too much labor for the ordinary hunter and angler. Also, they were open\
to the objection, that while wide enough in front, they ran down to a\
dismal, cold peak at the far end. Remembering, however, the many\
pleasant winter nights I had passed with the coal-burners, I bought a\
supply of oil-cloth and rigged it on the same principle. It was a\
partial success, and I used it for one season. But that cold, peaked,\
dark space was always back of my head, and it seemed like an iceberg. It\
was in vain that I tied a handkerchief about my head, or drew a stocking\
leg over it. That miserable, icy angle was always there. And it would\
only shelter one man anyhow. When winter drove me out of the woods I\
gave it to an enthusiastic young friend, bought some more oil-cloth, and\
commenced a shanty-tent that was meant to be perfect. A good many\
leisure hours were spent in cutting and sewing that shanty, which proved\
rather a success. It afforded a perfect shelter for a space 7\'d74 feet,\
but was a trifle heavy to pack, and the glazing began to crack and peel\
off in a short time. I made another and larger one of stout drilling,\
soaked in lime-water and alum; and this was all that could be asked when\
put up properly on a frame. But, the sides and ends being sewed to the\
roof made it unhandy to use as a shelter, when shelter was needed on\
short notice. So I ripped the back ends of the sides loose from the\
flap, leaving it, when spread out, as shown in the diagram. This was\
better; when it was necessary to make some sort of shelter in short\
order, it could be done with a single pole as used in the Indian camp,\
laying the tent across the pole, and using a few tacks to keep it in\
place at sides and center. This can be done in ten minutes, and makes a\
shelter-tent that will turn a heavy rain for hours.\
\
[Illustration]\
\
On the whole, for all kinds of weather, the shanty-tent is perhaps the\
best style of camp to be had at equal expense and trouble.\
\
For a summer camp, however, I have finally come to prefer the simple\
lean-to or shed roof. It is the lightest, simplest and cheapest of all\
cloth devices for camping out, and I have found it sufficient for all\
weathers from June until the fall of the leaves. It is only a sheet of\
strong cotton cloth 9\'d77 feet, and soaked in lime and alum-water as the\
other. The only labor in making it is sewing two breadths of sheeting\
together. It needs no hemming, binding, loops or buttons, but is to be\
stretched on a frame as described for the brush shanty, and held in\
place with tacks. The one I have used for two seasons cost sixty cents,\
and weighs 2-1/4 pounds. It makes a good shelter for a party of three;\
and if it be found a little too breezy for cool nights, a sufficient\
windbreak can be made by driving light stakes at the sides and weaving\
in a siding of hemlock boughs.\
\
[Sidenote: _Sparks_]\
\
Lastly, whatever cloth structure you may elect to use for a camp, do not\
fail to cover the roof with a screen of green boughs before building\
your camp-fire. Because there will usually be one fellow in camp who has\
a penchant for feeding the fire with old mulchy deadwood and brush, for\
the fun of watching the blaze, and the sparks that are prone to fly\
upward; forgetting that the blazing cinders are also prone to drop\
downward on the roof of the tent, burning holes in it.\
\
I have spoken of some of the best camps I know. The worst ones are the A\
and wall tents, with all closed camps in which one is required to\
seclude himself through the hours of sleep in damp and darkness, utterly\
cut off from the cheerful, healthful light and warmth of the camp-fire.\
\
\
\
\
Chapter IV\
\
     CAMP-FIRES AND THEIR IMPORTANCE--THE WASTEFUL WRONG WAY THEY\
     ARE USUALLY MADE, AND THE RIGHT WAY TO MAKE THEM\
\
\
Hardly second in importance to a warm, dry camp, is the camp-fire. In\
point of fact, the warmth, dryness, and healthfulness of a forest camp\
are mainly dependent on the way the fire is managed and kept up. No\
asthmatic or consumptive patient ever regained health by dwelling in a\
close, damp tent. I once camped for a week in a wall tent, with a\
Philadelphia party, and in cold weather. We had a little sheet iron\
fiend, called a camp-stove. When well fed with bark, knots and chips, it\
would get red hot, and, heaven knows, give out heat enough. By the time\
we were sound asleep, it would subside; and we would presently awake\
with chattering teeth to kindle her up again, take a smoke and a nip,\
turn in for another nap--to awaken again half frozen. It was a poor\
substitute for the open camp and bright fire. An experience of fifty\
years convinces me that a large percentage of the benefit obtained by\
invalids from camp life is attributable to the open camp and\
well-managed camp-fire. And the latter is usually handled in a way that\
is too sad, too wasteful; in short, badly botched. For instance.\
\
[Sidenote: _The "Guides' Camp"_]\
\
It happened in the summer of '81 that I was making a canoe trip in the\
Northern Wilderness, and as Raquette Lake is the largest and about the\
most interesting lake in the North Woods, I spent about a week paddling,\
fishing, etc. I made my headquarters at Ed. Bennett's woodland hostelry,\
"Under the Hemlocks." As the hotel was filled with men, women and\
crying children, bitten to agony by punkies and mosquitoes, I chose to\
spread my blanket in a well-made bark shanty, which a sign-board in\
black and white said was the "Guides' Camp."\
\
And this camp was a very popular institution. Here it was that every\
evening, when night had settled down on forest and lake, the guests of\
the hotel would gather to lounge on the bed of fresh balsam browse,\
chat, sing and enjoy the huge camp-fire.\
\
No woodland hotel will long remain popular that does not keep up a\
bright, cheery, out-o'-door fire. And the fun of it--to an old\
woodsman--is in noting how like a lot of school children they all act\
about the fire. Ed. Bennett had a man, a North Woods trapper, in his\
employ, whose chief business was to furnish plenty of wood for the\
guides' camp, and start a good fire every evening by sundown. As it grew\
dark and the blaze shone high and bright, the guests would begin to\
straggle in; and every man, woman and child seemed to view it as a\
religious duty to pause by the fire, and add a stick or two, before\
passing into camp. The wood was thrown on endwise, crosswise, or any\
way, so that it would burn, precisely as a crowd of boys make a bonfire\
on the village green. The object being, apparently, to get rid of the\
wood in the shortest possible time.\
\
When the fire burnt low, toward mid-night, the guests would saunter off\
to the hotel; and the guides, who had been waiting impatiently, would\
organize what was left of the fire, roll themselves in their blankets,\
and turn in. I suggested to the trapper that he and I make one fire as\
it should be, and maybe they would follow suit--which would save half\
the fuel, with a better fire. But he said, "No; they like to build\
bonfires, and 'Ed.' can stand the wood, because it is best to let them\
have their own way. Time seems to hang heavy on their hands--and they\
pay well." Summer boarders, tourists and sportsmen, are not the only men\
who know how to build a camp-fire all wrong.\
\
When I first came to Northern Pennsylvania, thirty-five years ago, I\
found game fairly abundant; and, as I wanted to learn the country where\
deer most abounded, I naturally cottoned to the local hunters. Good\
fellows enough, and conceited, as all local hunters and anglers are apt\
to be. Strong, good hunters and axe-men, to the manner born, and prone\
to look on any outsider as a tenderfoot. Their mode of building\
camp-fires was a constant vexation to me. They made it a point to always\
have a heavy sharp axe in camp, and toward night some sturdy chopper\
would cut eight or ten logs as heavy as the whole party could lug to\
camp with hand-spikes. The size of the logs was proportioned to the\
muscular force in camp. If there was a party of six or eight, the logs\
would be twice as heavy as when we were three or four. Just at dark,\
there would be a log heap built in front of the camp, well chinked with\
bark, knots and small sticks; and, for the next two hours, one could\
hardly get at the fire to light a pipe. But the fire was sure though\
slow. By 10 or 11 P.M. it would work its way to the front, and the camp\
would be warm and light. The party would turn in, and deep sleep would\
fall on a lot of tired hunters--for two or three hours. By which time\
some fellow near the middle was sure to throw his blanket off with a\
spiteful jerk, and dash out of camp with, "Holy Moses! I can't stand\
this; it's an oven."\
\
Another Snorer (partially waking).--"N-r-r-rm, gu-r-r, ugh. Can't\
you--deaden--fire--a little?"\
\
First Speaker.--"Deaden h----. If you want the fire deadened, get up and\
help throw off some of these logs."\
\
Another (in coldest corner of shanty)--"What's 'er matter--with a-you\
fellows? Better dig out--an' cool off in the snow. Shanty's comfor'ble\
enough."\
\
His minority report goes unheeded. The camp is roasted out. Strong hands\
and hand-spikes pry a couple of glowing logs from the front and replace\
them with two cold, green logs; the camp cools off, and the party takes\
to blankets once more--to turn out again at 5 A.M., and inaugurate\
breakfast. The fire is not in favorable shape for culinary operations,\
the heat is mainly on the back side, just where it isn't wanted. The few\
places level enough to set a pot or pan are too hot; and, in short,\
where there is any fire, there is too much. One man sees, with intense\
disgust, the nozzle of his coffee-pot drop into the fire. He makes a\
rash grab to save his coffee, and gets away--with the handle, which\
hangs on just enough to upset the pot.\
\
"Old Al.," who is frying a slice of pork over a bed of coals that would\
melt a gun barrel, starts a horse laugh, that is cut short by a blue\
flash and an explosion of pork fat, which nearly blinds him. And the\
writer, taking in these mishaps in the very spirit of fun and frolic, is\
suddenly sobered and silenced by seeing his venison steak drop from the\
end of the "frizzling stick," and disappear between two glowing logs.\
The party manages, however, to get off on the hunt at daylight, with\
full stomachs; and perhaps the hearty fun and laughter more than\
compensate for these little mishaps.\
\
This is a digression. But I am led to it by the recollection of many\
nights spent in camps and around camp-fires, pretty much as described\
above. I can smile today at the remembrance of the calm, superior way in\
which the old hunters of that day would look down on me, as from the\
upper branches of a tall hemlock, when I ventured to suggest that a\
better fire could be made with half the fuel and less than half the\
labor. They would kindly remark, "Oh, you are a Boston boy. You are used\
to paying $8.00 a cord for wood. We have no call to save wood here. We\
can afford to burn it by the acre." Which was more true than logical.\
Most of these men had commenced life with a stern declaration of war\
against the forest; and, although the men usually won at last, the\
battle was a long and hard one. Small wonder that they came to look upon\
a forest tree as a natural enemy. The camp-fire question came to a\
crisis, however, with two or three of these old settlers. And, as the\
story well illustrates my point, I will venture to tell it.}